Assassin's Creed Unity DLC Pass Includes a New 2.5D Game Set in China
Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China, which stars female hero Shao Jun, included with the game's $30 DLC pass.
by Eddie Makuch on September 22, 2014
Ubisoft today announced the Assassin's Creed Unity season pass, a $30 offering that includes access to new missions, weapons, gear, skills, and a brand-new Assassin's Creed game itself set in China.
The first major component of the Assassin's Creed Unity DLC pass is the Dead Kings story campaign, which takes place after the events of the main game. In this content, protagonist Arno leaves Paris and "finds himself wrapped up in the mysteries surrounding Saint Denis."
You'll explore the city's underground network of tunnels, using Arno's lantern to guide you. Ubisoft teases that players will need fight off "animals wandering in the darkness."
Aiding Arno in his journey to explore the catacombs and fight off the secretive Raider faction are new weapons, including the Guillotine Gun. The Dead Kings expansion will also include various new side missions, though these were not detailed.
Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China
In this content, players can also participate in new activities like treasure hunts, murder mysteries, and contracts, as well as new co-op missions. Players will unlock new weapons, gears, skills, and outfits in this expansion that they can carry back to the main game.
You'll also notice that the Dead Kings missions are, tonally, very different from the main game. "This is truly the darkest story that we've ever told on the franchise," creative director Alex Amancio says. "It is dark, and very different from the rest of the game."
The next major component of Unity's DLC pass is a brand-new game called Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China, which represents a standalone story set in 16th century China. The 2.5D sidescrolling game stars an Assassin named Shao Jun, a female character fans met in the Assassin's Creed Embers animated movie.
Shao Jun was trained by Ezio Auditore from earlier Assassin's Creed games. In Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China, Shao Jun returns to Beijing as the final remaining Assassin in the Chinese Brotherhood, out for vengeance against "those who destroyed her Brotherhood."
The art style for Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China, as you can see in the image above, was inspired by traditional brush paintings. Because Shao Jun is a martial arts master, she has new skills and gear like the Jian Sword and the Foot Blade. Some of the locations you'll visit in the game include the Great Wall of China and the Forbidden City.
Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China was developed by Climax Studios, which most recently released the PC version of Castlevania: Lords of Shadow. Asked if Assassin's Creed Chronicles: China will be sold outside of the Unity DLC pass, a Ubisoft representative told GameSpot, "Right now the only way to get access to Chronicles is through the Season Pass."
For the main Unity experience, the DLC pass unlocks three additional missions, as well as more than 30 new items, including new weapons, equipment, and outfits. You'll also receive the Fleur de Lys sword on launch day.
All of the content above is scheduled to be available by early 2015. Preordering the DLC pass will get you an "exclusive" double-handed war axe.
Assassin's Creed Unity launches November 11 for Xbox One, PlayStation 4, and PC. Another game, Assassin's Creed Rogue, is also launching on that day, but it's coming only to Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3. Ubisoft has not yet announced a DLC pass for Assassin's Creed Rogue, but we do know about its preorder bonuses.
