We live in an age of ubiquitous social networks. Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and LinkedIn are the social powerhouses for our generation, serving as the hub for how we share photos, videos and news with friends and how we network professionally. These companies have nearly perfected the formula that drives users to connect with them every day, and as their user bases grow so too does the value of these companies.

Although the biggest social networks have touched over a billion people around the globe, there is one group they haven’t been able to win yet — the family. Scores of companies have been racing to re-create the Facebook formula and apply it to families, yet few have achieved any true scale. Families are not the sexiest user base to design products for, or for press to cover, but they hold enormous value for companies who can crack the code.

Larger societal and family trends have aligned recently to create the perfect conditions that will allow for the rise of the family network. Families are incredibly connected today, and the adoption of smartphones now extends down to even pre-teen family members. In addition to core family units having the ability to be online, reachable and connected at all times, there is the issue of aging baby boomers who increasingly rely on their extended family to help them on a daily basis.

The Family is a Different Equation

Today’s families don’t want another social channel to share pictures, videos, or contacts — those networks exist. Families are looking for something much more simple and utilitarian — a network that addresses daily family needs like safety and private communication among on-the-go family members. The family network must keep the entire family connected and be easy to use, wile serving an important function by simplifying the daily routine.

The vast majority of family interactions are around checking in: Where are you? Have you left school or work? Where is the soccer game today? These messages are intended for only those in the immediate family circle, not everyone in their social sphere. At the heart of most check-ins is location awareness. Location is a critical component of staying connected, eliminating annoying or frustrating “where are you?” messages, and giving families peace of mind that everyone is where they should be.

The family network is about simplifying the daily routine. Not sure which soccer field Junior has practice on tonight? Use the power of location technology to take you directly to your child. Want to know if your partner has left the office for the day so you can start dinner or run a quick errand? Simply set alerts based on his or her most frequently used locations.

Location is the key to winning the family network, and the implications of this extend far beyond peace of mind. Once a company becomes a relied upon hub of the family, the potential for extending that hub into the home, the car and other areas of daily life becomes very exciting.