Introduction

Ruminants such as cattle, sheep, deer, yak, buffalo and goats are of great importance for the production of meat and dairy products, wool, and leather. Globally, ruminants are maintained under a diverse range of farming systems and environments, and are fed a wide variety of diets. Ruminants have a complex digestive system, and digestion of feed takes place initially in the rumen. There, microbes play a key role in the breakdown of feed components such as fibre, producing short chain fatty acids that provide energy for the host. Rumen microbes are thus essential providers of animal energy and nutrition, and play a key role in the productivity and health of ruminants. Rumen archaea produce the greenhouse gas methane as a metabolic end product. This methane gas is eructated by ruminants and represents 2 to 12% dietary gross energy lost to the animal [1]. Understanding the functions and compositions of rumen microbial communities is required to improve animal productivity and to reduce the amount of energy lost as methane.

The rumen microbial community is highly complex. There are approximately 1011 microbial cells per gram of rumen contents and these belong to many different species and genera of bacteria, archaea [2], fungi, ciliate protozoa [3] and viruses [4]. To date, relatively few of these have been successfully cultured and characterised. Molecular analyses of rumen microbial communities allow as-yet uncultivated microbes to be detected, and have become essential tools to determine shifts that occur within microbial communities, for example, during changes in diet. The development of high-throughput sequencing techniques has made detailed microbial analyses of large-scale trials feasible, allowing subtle effects on microbial community composition to be detected as changes in absolute and relative numbers of microbial marker loci.

DNA of sufficient yield and quality is the crucial starting material for these analyses. Microbial inhabitants of the rumen are highly diverse and not all DNA extraction methods work equally well for different microbial groups. To date, several studies have shown that the DNA extraction method used has an impact on the microbial community representation in samples from different habitats [5–9], including the rumen [10]. The sampling technique (e.g. oral stomach tubing and collecting through a rumen fistula) and rumen sample fractionation (into e.g. liquid and solid) can also have an impact on microbial community parameters [3,11–13].

To enable the direct comparison of rumen community structure data from studies conducted in different laboratories and around the world, it is crucial that the rumen sampling, sample fractionation and DNA extraction methods are standardised, or at least have been shown to produce similar results. The aim of this study was to systematically compare a variety of different DNA extraction methods and their impacts on the downstream analysis of rumen microbial communities using molecular ecological methods. To do this, the quality and quantity of DNA obtained by the different methods was compared, as were bacterial, archaeal, ciliate protozoal and fungal abundances and community compositions based on microbial marker loci. In addition, the effect on microbial community composition of sampling the rumen through a fistula or using an oral stomach tube and the effect of sample fractionation was investigated. The overall goal was to find comparable and simple methods that 1) deliver high quality DNA for the majority of microbial groups, 2) are suitable for different molecular microbial ecology analyses, 3) will be suitable for use in large cohort studies, and 4) are easily transferable to other researchers.
Materials and Methods
Ethics statement

The use of animals, including welfare, husbandry, experimental procedures, and the collection of rumen samples used for this study, was approved by the AgResearch Grasslands (Palmerston North, New Zealand) and AgResearch Ruakura (Hamilton, New Zealand) Animal Ethics Committees, and complied with the institutional Codes of Ethical Conduct for the Use of Animals in Research, Testing and Teaching, as prescribed in the Animal Welfare Act of 1999 and its amendments (New Zealand). Rumen samples were collected as part of a series of trials conducted in New Zealand under permit numbers 12002, 12174 and 12391 (AgResearch, Grasslands Research Centre, Palmerston North), and 11897 (AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton). The animals were kept at AgResearch’s Grasslands Research Centre and at Lye farm, Hamilton. Rumen samples were collected according to protocols approved in the relevant Animal Ethics approvals by sampling through a fistula or via stomach tubing.
Comparison of DNA extraction methods

Rumen contents were collected in September of 2009 from a ruminally-fistulated Friesian-Jersey cross cow (Bos taurus, AgResearch animal identifier 723) and a Romney wether (Ovis aries, animal identifier 5472). The previously pasture-fed cow was fed 6 kg of meadow/pasture hay per day for one week before sampling and had free access to water at all times. The wether was maintained on a pasture diet which was mainly comprised of ryegrass (Lolium perenne). Food was withheld from the animals for two hours before sampling. Rumen samples (about 50 g) were accurately weighed, frozen at −85°C within 30 min of sampling, and freeze-dried. Each entire freeze dried sample was homogenised with a 100 W household coffee grinder (Russell Hobbs, Mordialloc, Victoria, Australia) and stored in airtight bags at −85°C.

In total, 15 DNA extraction protocols were compared (Table 1). The methods chosen are used to extract DNA from rumen and faecal samples in our and other laboratories. Unless otherwise stated, all methods were carried out as outlined in the instructions provided by the authors and manufacturers. Each DNA extraction method was performed in triplicate, each with 25 to 30 mg (accurately weighed) of each freeze-dried rumen sample, unless noted otherwise. DNA extracts were dispensed into 10- to 20-µl single-use aliquots, and frozen at -20 C, to avoid repeat freeze-thawing of DNA prior to downstream analyses.
Name	Abbreviation	Comments	Reference or manufacturer
CTAB-based method	CTAB	18 units of proteinase K (New England Biolabs Inc, Ipswich, MA, USA) in a 30 µl volume and 80 µl CTAB solution were used per sample	[32]
FastDNA® Spin Kit with buffer TC	FDTB	Followed manufacturer’s instructions	Q·BIOgene, MP Biomedicals LLC, Solon, OH, USA
FastDNA® Spin Kit with buffer Y	FDYF	Followed manufacturer’s instructions	Q·BIOgene
InstaGene™ matrix	IGMA	Followed manufacturer’s instructions	Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA
NucleoSpin® based method	NUSP		[33]
Phenol-chloroform with bead beating I	PCBB		[34]
Phenol-chloroform, bead beating, with filtration kit for purification I	PCFI	As for PCBB, DNA filtered with QIAquick® PCR purification kit; QIAgen, Hilden, Germany	[18]
Phenol-chloroform with no bead beating	PCNB	As for PCBB, but omitted bead beating step	Unpublished
Phenol-chloroform, bead beating, with filtration kit for purification II	PCQI	Modified PCBB, buffers used as described, DNA filtered with QIAquick® PCR purification kit	[14]
Phenol-chloroform with bead beating II	PCSA	As for PCBB, but phenol-chloroform added prior to and used in bead beating step	
PSP®Spin Stool DNA Kit, protocol 1	PSP1	Followed manufacturer’s protocol 1	Invitek GmbH, Berlin, Germany
PSP®Spin Stool DNA Kit, protocol 1	PSP2	Followed manufacturer’s protocol 2	Invitek GmbH
QIAamp® DNA Stool Mini Kit	QIAG	Followed manufacturer’s protocol for isolation of DNA from stool for pathogen detection, employing the 95°C heating option	QIAgen, Hilden, Germany
Repeated bead beating plus column	RBBC		[10]
ZR Fecal DNA MiniPrep	ZYMO	Followed manufacturer’s instructions	ZYMO Research Corporation, Orange, CA, USA

Table 1. DNA extraction methods used in this study.
CSV
Download CSV
Comparison of bead beating times

DNA was extracted in duplicate from four rumen samples collected from cow 723 and sheep 5472 [details above], and lucerne (Medicago sativa) chaff-fed Romney cross sheep (animal identifiers 322 and 325) using the PCQI method. The bead beating step was performed for 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 min in a Mini-Beadbeater-96 (Biospec Products, Bartlesville, OK, USA) or for 45 s at 6.5 m s-1 in a FastPrep FP120 (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA).
Comparison of rumen sampling methods

Rumen samples were collected from 14 dairy cows fed fresh ryegrass dominant pasture by sampling using either oral stomach tubing or through the rumen fistula (see [14] for more details on the animals). For sampling by oral stomach tubing, a stainless steel pipe (25 mm outside diameter, wall thickness 1.2 mm) measuring 520 mm in length with a 'T' handle 350 mm from one end was used to guide the lavage tube over the back of the tongue to ensure it entered the rumen. The lavage tube (19 mm outside diameter) enabled contents to be aspirated using a 400 ml syringe from the centre of the dorsal rumen, and separate observations showed sampling to be 3 to 12 cm below the surface of the rumen contents and adjacent to the fistula. When sampling through the fistula, a handful of rumen contents was taken from the mid-point of the rumen, placed in a container and a second handful of rumen contents was squeezed to obtain liquid, which was added to the same container. Samples were frozen, freeze-dried, homogenised, DNA was extracted using the PCQI method (see Table 1 for details), and the microbial community composition determined as described below.
Comparison of total, solid and liquid rumen sample fractions

The comparisons were made between samples collected via the fistulae of 16 cows using the same procedure and animals plus two additional cows from the same herd as the comparison of rumen sampling methods (above) and solid and liquid fractions. Fractionation was immediately post sampling, and each sample was divided into a liquid fraction, which passed through a 0.8 mm side of square hole sieve mesh, and a solid fraction (material retained by a 0.8 mm sieve mesh). Sample fractions were frozen, freeze-dried, homogenised, DNA was extracted using the PCQI method (see Table 1 for details), and the microbial community composition determined as described below.
Yield, purity and integrity of DNA

DNA concentrations were measured spectrophotometrically (A260 nm, NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and fluorometrically (Quant-iT™ dsDNA Broad Range Assay Kit, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The purity of DNA was assessed spectrophotometrically from A260 nm/A230 nm and A260 nm/A280 nm ratios to indicate possible contamination of DNA with buffer salts and organic compounds. Integrity was determined by agarose (0.5% wt/vol) gel electrophoresis (2 h, 10 × 15 cm Mini-Sub® Cell GT, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) at 60 V using 1 Kb Plus DNA Ladder and λ DNA/Hind III fragments as molecular weight markers, post-staining with SYBR® Safe DNA gel stain (Invitrogen), and illumination under UV light.
Assessing suitability of DNA for PCR-based microbial ecology applications