
Background

In recent years, studies on the human intestinal microbiota have attracted tremendous attention. Application of next generation sequencing for mapping of bacterial phylogeny and function has opened new doors to this field of research. However, little attention has been given to the effects of choice of methodology on the output resulting from such studies.
Results

In this study we conducted a systematic comparison of the DNA extraction methods used by the two major collaborative efforts: The European MetaHIT and the American Human Microbiome Project (HMP). Additionally, effects of homogenizing the samples before extraction were addressed. We observed significant differences in distribution of bacterial taxa depending on the method. While eukaryotic DNA was most efficiently extracted by the MetaHIT protocol, DNA from bacteria within the Bacteroidetes phylum was most efficiently extracted by the HMP protocol.
Conclusions

Whereas it is comforting that the inter-individual variation clearly exceeded the variation resulting from choice of extraction method, our data highlight the challenge of comparing data across studies applying different methodologies.
Background

In recent years, the community structure of human intestinal bacteria has received tremendous attention. The option of next generation sequencing for mapping of intestinal bacterial phylogeny and function has opened new doors to this field of research. However, little attention has been paid to the effects of sampling procedure and choice of methodology on the output resulting from such studies. Several practical challenges are associated with the collection of fecal samples in large human studies. Ideally, feces should be delivered anaerobically and processed directly after delivery. For obvious reasons, however, this normally cannot be achieved, and it is thus almost always necessary for microbiologists to base their studies on frozen samples that have been exposed to oxygen. Some reports indicate that freezing has a minor influence on the composition of extracted bacterial DNA from feces [1,2]. However, as long as we do not need to address the activities of live and oxygen-sensitive intestinal bacteria, but only to describe the composition of a given fecal bacterial community based on the bacterial DNA present in the sample, factors like oxygen exposure and freezing are not likely to have a large impact. It has thus previously been reported that, for example, the storage time of fecal samples before freezing does not have a major influence on the composition of fecal bacterial communities [3].

It is well documented that major differences exist between the mucosal and luminal bacterial populations of the human gut [4] and that the abundance and complexity of these populations vary between the different topographical sites of the bowel [5]. Keeping this in mind, it seems unlikely that the bacterial communities are completely evenly distributed within the volume of a fecal sample. Nevertheless, most recent studies of the human microbiota are based on DNA extraction from a very small subsample (typically 100 to 150 μl) of an un-homogenized sample. This is of little importance in cross-sectional studies where the inter-individual variations by far exceed variations attributed to subsample-site; however, it may be of major relevance in longitudinal studies comparing samples taken from the same individual over time. In the present study, we address the effect of homogenization versus subsampling from un-homogenized fecal material. To our knowledge, this has not previously been done.

The choice of DNA extraction method following sampling and storage probably also has an impact on the revealed community structure [6,7]. In particular, the first step of DNA extraction - disruption and/or lysis of the bacterial membranes - can be expected to be biased for specific bacterial taxa due to differences in cell wall structure and integrity. This step often involves bead-beating, a mechanical disruption of the bacteria, resulting in a higher yield of extracted DNA [6]. The most pronounced difference between bacterial envelopes is that between Gram-positive and Gram-negative cell walls. It has been shown that DNA from Gram-positive bacteria present in feces is more efficiently extracted if a sample has been frozen, probably because of the impact of freezing and thawing on the Gram-positive cell-wall, as bead-beating has a larger impact on the amount of Gram-positive DNA extracted from fresh samples compared to frozen samples [1]. Thus, most studies comparing methods of DNA extraction find that the major impact on the resulting measured community structure is caused by the use of bead-beating [1,6,8]. In the present study, comparable procedures for bead-beating are incorporated in both of the investigated methods, which are used by the two major research consortia, the American Human Microbiome Project (HMP) [9] and the European MetaHIT project [10]. These large collaborations have both resulted in many high-impact publications related to intestinal bacterial communities in humans [11-15]. Both take advantage of next generation sequencing, which is therefore also applied in the present study, in order to identify differences caused by sampling and DNA extraction.
Methods
Collection and preparation of fecal samples

For comparison of purification methods, approximately 50 g fecal samples were collected and processed from three healthy human volunteers within 4 hours. Samples not handled immediately were stored at 4°C. To each sample an equal volume of sterile milli-Q water was added and samples were homogenized using a Stomacher machine (2 times for 60 s at highest setting). Aliquots of 1 ml were then transferred to cryo-tubes and frozen at -80°C until DNA extraction by either the HMP or MetaHIT procedure as described below. For each procedure, three aliquots of each sample were purified, resulting in a total of 18 DNA extractions for next generation sequencing sequencing (Figure  1).To address the effect of homogenization, one fecal sample (approximately 15 g) was collected and processed immediately following two separate procedures representing small volume scrapings and homogenization. Initially, 200 mg scrapings were taken from the fecal sample at three different locations and transferred directly into the bead-beating solution of the Mobio PowerLyzer™ PowerSoil® DNA isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA.). Then the remaining sample was homogenized in equal volume sterile milliQ water as described above and aliquots where transferred to 1 ml microcentifuge tubes. Three scrapings and three aliquots of the homogenized sample were purified by the HMP method as described below, resulting in a total of six DNA extractions for next generation sequencing (Figure  1).

thumbnailFigure 1. Schematic representation of the study design. A: Comparison of the HMP and MetaHIT DNA extraction methods, and B: comparison of homogenized and scraped samples.
DNA purification by the MetaHIT method

Fecal slurries (1:1 feces/water) were thawed and centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for 10 minutes and the supernatant was removed. Approximately 200 mg (±10 mg) was transferred to a new 2 ml tube to which 250 μl guanidine thiocyanate and 40 μl N-lauryl sarcosine (10%) was added and allowed to stand for 10 minutes after which 500 μl N-lauryl sarcosine (5%) was added and the sample mixed by vortexing, centrifuged briefly and heat-treated at 70°C for 1 to 2 hours. To each tube 750 μl of zirconia/silica beads (0.1 mm) (BioSpec, number 11079101z, Bartlesville, OK, USA) were added and bead-beating was performed at 30 cycles/s for 5 minutes, followed by 10 minutes rest, and bead-beating again for 5 minutes (Retsch GmbH MM 300 mixer mill, Haan, Germany). The remaining extraction procedure followed the previously published procedure [16]. DNA concentrations were determined fluorometrically (Qubit® dsDNA BR assay, Life Technologies Europe, Naerum, Denmark) and purity was determined spectrophotometrically (NanoDrop 1000 Spectophotometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were stored at -20°C until sequencing.
DNA purification by the HMP method

DNA was extracted from fecal samples using the Mobio PowerLyzer™ PowerSoil® DNA isolation Kit (MO BIO Laboratories) with slight modifications as follows. Fecal slurries (1:1 feces/water) were thawed and centrifuged at 13,000 RPM for 10 minutes and the supernatant was removed. Approximately 200 mg (±10 mg) was transferred to the bead-beating tube, bead solution added and then heat treated at 65°C for 10 minutes and then 95°C for 10 minutes. Additional heat treatment was also applied to samples undergoing the HMP procedure with the MoBIO DNA extraction kit. Bead-beating of the samples was performed at 30 cycles/s for 5 minutes, followed by 10 minutes rest, and bead-beating again for 5 minutes (Retsch MM 300 mixer mill); the beads in the kit were the same size as those used in for MetaHIT method. The remaining DNA extraction procedure followed the standard protocol supplied by the company and final elution of DNA was performed with 100 μl Tris (MoBIO buffer C6). DNA concentrations and purity were determined as stated above, and samples were stored at -20°C until sequencing.
DNA library construction and sequencing

DNA libraries were pooled in groups of six samples per sequencing lane. Sequencing was performed with 100-nucleotide-long paired-end reads on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) sequencer with a total of four sequencing lanes containing the pooled libraries. Raw reads were submitted to the Short Read Archive (SRP040956).
Read mapping

The total number of raw reads was downsampled to 29,012,054 reads per sample for samples used for comparison of extraction methods, and to 25,903,352 reads per sample for samples used to address the effect of homogenization. The final number of raw reads for each sample corresponded to the total number of raw reads obtained for the sample with the smallest number of reads within each group. The sequencing adaptors and any overrepresented sequences detected by FastQC [17] were removed and the high quality reads obtained from sequencing were trimmed with Trimmomatic [18]. The sequencing reads for each sample were then mapped to the reference human genome build 37 (GRCh37) using Burrow-Wheelers Aligner [19] to remove reads of human origin. In the mapping, the median insert size was estimated to be 164, and the average fragment length was 360 nucleotides. The reads that did not map to the human genome were mapped further to a set of reference sequences of known bacterial, fungal, plant and viral genomes retrieved from the NCBI Genome database (2 July 2012). The sequencing reads were also mapped to the assembled bacterial sequence catalogs generated by the HMP and the MetaHIT consortium, as well as to the gene catalog created for the purpose of this study, as described below.

Taxonomic abundance profiles were estimated for each sample with the MOCAT pipeline [20] incorporating bacterial references from the RefMG.v1 database [21], based on single copy marker genes from 1,753 bacterial reference genomes.
Gene prediction

Gene catalogs for each sample were created using the MOCAT pipeline [20], starting with the downsized numbers of raw reads for each sample as described above. Briefly, the pipeline performs quality control of the raw reads, removes human contamination by mapping to the reference human genome, assembles the reads and predicts protein-coding genes on the assembled metagenomes. The redundancy within the resulting gene catalogs was further reduced with CD-HIT [22] using 90% sequence similarity and word size of five. Direct comparison of the individual gene catalogs was performed using CD-HIT at 90% sequence similarity. For the purpose of creation of the rarefaction curve of recovered genes as a function of raw sequencing reads, a complete gene catalog was created for all the samples. The raw reads were mapped against this complete gene catalog, and gene recovery for different numbers of reads was calculated from the resulting SAM file and plotted in the form of a rarefaction curve.
Taxonomic and functional assignment

Taxonomic assignment for the method-specific genes was performed using BLAST + with the NCBI nucleotide database. Functional assignment for predicted genes was performed with BLAST +  [23] against the eggNOG protein sequence database [24].
Statistical analysis and cluster analysis

All statistical analyses were performed in R [25]. Statistical significance of the effect of the DNA extraction method on the observed abundances of bacterial genera were calculated with two-way ANOVA, and the differences between homogenized and scraped samples with Wilcoxon rank test. For multiple comparisons the P-values were corrected by Bonferroni correction and corrected P-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Hierarchical clustering was performed with the heatmap2 package implemented in R. Plots were generated using ggplot2 and qplot R packages.
