oth the extraction methods resulted in sufficient yields and purity of DNA to perform Illumina HighSeq sequencing (Additional file 1). We observed significantly higher yields of DNA following extraction by the MetaHIT method compared with the HMP method (P < 0.0001, Mann-Whitney test), which may in part be caused by a limited binding capacity of DNA in columns used in the HMP method.

Additional file 1: Table S1. DNA yield and purity obtained with the two methods.

Format: PDF Size: 57KB Download file

This file can be viewed with: Adobe Acrobat ReaderOpen Data
Distribution of taxa resulting from the two methods

Depending on the applied DNA extraction method, we observed significant differences in numbers of raw sequencing reads mapped to known reference genomes. Eukaryotic genomes of human, fungi and plants were significantly more present in the samples extracted with the MetaHIT method, while known bacterial genomes had significantly more reads mapped to them when extracted with the HMP method (Figure  2). Those differences were further examined for lower taxonomic ranks of bacteria, and we observed significant differences for several of the most abundant genera within the Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria phyla (Figure  3). The most prominent differences were observed among Bacteroidetes, where the HMP extraction method resulted in significantly higher estimated abundances for three out of the six most prevalent genera. This significantly (P = 0.00021) influenced estimation of the ratio between the two most common phyla, Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes (Figure S1 in Additional file 2).Hierarchical clustering of samples and bacterial genera based on their estimated abundance showed that the between-sample variation was higher than the between-method variation (Figure  4A). However, samples extracted with the same DNA extraction method clustered together, highlighting the impact of the method used on the detected composition of the sample.

thumbnailFigure 2. Summary of read mapping to known reference genome sequences of different taxonomic groups. As expected, the highest numbers of reads could be mapped to known bacterial genomes, with a slightly higher number of reads mapped with the HMP method (P = 0.0212). Despite overall low number of reads mapped to eukaryotic organism reference genomes, the differences in read counts attributed to the DNA extraction methods were highly significant, with the MetaHIT method resulting in a higher number of reads of eukaryotic origin in all cases. P-values were calculated with two-way ANOVA.

thumbnailFigure 3. Comparison of abundance estimations for bacterial genera with MetaHIT and HMP methods. (A) Relative abundance of the most prevalent bacterial genera with MetaHIT and HMP DNA extraction methods. The horizontal line is plotted at a value of 0.5, corresponding to equal abundance of a given genus detected by both methods. (B) Estimated abundance of the 25 most abundant bacterial genera with established taxonomy mapping shows clear differences for several genera. The most significant differences are observed for Bacteroidetes; for three out of six cases the HMP method resulted in higher numbers of reads mapped to respective species. (*:P < 0.05; **:P < 0.01; ***:P < 0.001).

Additional file 2: Figure S1. Firmicutes/Bacteriodetes ratio obtained with the two methods. Figure S2. Heatmap (as Figure  4A) based on all taxonomic groups. Figure S3. Correlation of bacterial abundances obtained by the two methods. Figure S4. Correlation of gene abundances obtained by the two methods.

Format: PDF Size: 111KB Download file

This file can be viewed with: Adobe Acrobat ReaderOpen Data

thumbnailFigure 4. Hierarchical clustering. (A) Read counts mapped to the 25 most abundant bacterial genera for the three samples with three replicates for the two DNA extraction methods. Overall, the biggest observable difference results from between-sample variability, and regardless of the DNA extraction method used, the bacterial abundance profile can be assigned to the right individual. (B) Read counts mapped to the 25 most abundant bacterial genera for comparison of the effect of homogenizing and scraping of the samples. All the replicates were extracted from the same biological sample with the same DNA extraction method (HMP); therefore, the only source of variation comes from homogenizing or scraping of the samples before DNA extraction. As shown by the branch length in the sample clustering dendrogram, we observe higher between-replicate variability in the case of scraped samples.
Effect of homogenization

Homogenization of samples before DNA extraction resulted in less within-sample variability, as evidenced by longer branch lengths for the non-homogenized samples in hierarchical clustering of the estimated abundance for the 25 most prevalent bacterial genera (Figure  4B). Additionally, the taxonomy abundance profiles cluster according to whether or not homogenization was performed. Due to the low numbers of samples compared in this case, any observed differences in taxonomy, function, number of mapped reads or number of predicted genes per replicate lack strict statistical significance, and are therefore not presented in detail in this work.
Comparison of gene catalog composition

The reference gene catalogs created by both the HMP and MetaHIT consortiums had significantly more reads mapped to them when extracted with the HMP method (Figure  5). Additionally, comparison of the number of predicted genes resulting from each DNA extraction showed that the HMP method yielded a significantly higher number of predicted genes (P = 0.0031) than the MetaHIT method (Figure  6A). A considerable amount of variability in the gene compositions was detected even between different replicates of the same extraction method, and only 33.9% of the total gene catalog for one sample was detected unanimously in all three replicates of both methods (Figure  6B).Exploration of both the taxonomy and functional category assignments of the genes detected in all three replicates of one method but in none of the replicates of the other method further highlights the differences in composition of the samples extracted with the different methods. More genes were detected in all replicates by the HMP method but in none by the MetaHIT method, than the reverse observation (2.0% versus 0.87%; Figure  6B). Differences were apparent for most genera (Figure  6C), and were also reflected in the functional categories of the mapped genes, with the most pronounced differences occurring in the functional categories B (chromatin structure and dynamics), J (translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis) and O (post-translational modification, protein turnover, chaperone functions). The HMP extraction method also resulted in more genes with no function assigned (Figure  6D).Comparison of number of genes recovered from a total gene catalog created for the purpose of the present study (Figure  7) illustrated that, with the sequencing depths achieved, we captured a substantial proportion of the gene diversity in the studied samples, and that there were big differences in gene number between individuals. Regardless of the DNA extraction method used, however, the overall numbers of genes detected were roughly similar for each individual.

thumbnailFigure 5. Read mapping to the human gut microbiome reference sequence catalogues. We observe significantly higher numbers of raw sequencing reads mapping to both reference catalogs for DNA extracted with the HMP method. For both extraction methods, more reads mapped to the MetaHIT catalog, suggesting that this catalog serves as a more complete representation of the gut microbiome. (*:P < 0.05; **:P < 0.01).

thumbnailFigure 6. Comparison of the gene catalog for different replicates of the two DNA extraction methods. (A) For each individual a total gene catalog was created using all six replicates, resulting in total number of genes shown in the second row. The following rows show the numbers and percentage of the genes from the total gene catalog present in the gene catalogs for the individual replicates. (B) Schematic representation of the total gene catalog for one of the studied individuals, showing overlap of the genes discovered by all, some or none of the replicates with the HMP and MetaHIT methods. (C) Taxonomy annotation at the genus level for the genes specific to each method, that is, detected in all three replicates from one method, but none of the replicates from the other method. (D) Functional category annotation for the genes specific to each method.

thumbnailFigure 7. Rarefaction curve. Rarefaction curve created for the purpose of this study and showing the number of genes from the total gene catalog that could be discovered with increasing numbers of raw sequencing reads. The rarefaction curves for each individual group together in the plot, showing much more variation in gene content between individuals than variation attributed to the DNA extraction method.
Discussion

We have applied next generation sequencing of the fecal metagenome to address differences between the two procedures chosen for DNA purification by the two major research consortia, MetaHIT and HMP. The first observation was that the MetaHIT protocol, which is based on laboratory-made buffers and solutions, resulted in a significantly higher yield than the kit-based HMP protocol (Additional file 1); however, yield and purity of DNA extracted with both protocols were sufficient for Illumina-based deep metagenome sequencing. These factors are crucial to consider before choosing a method, as both yield and purity will affect the applicability of the DNA for next generation sequencing. However, if many samples are to be analyzed, the extra amount of labor affiliated with the MetaHIT protocol may also be a relevant factor. We anticipated that the approach of the MetaHIT consortium might also lead to less reproducibility (larger technical variation) in the data than the standardized, kit-based approach used by HMP, but this was not indicated by the data. Still, as all our extractions were performed in the same lab and by the same person, it cannot be excluded that a larger amount of between-lab and between-person variation may result from applying a non-kit-based protocol.

In spite of comparable bead-beating steps applied in the two methods, we found significant differences between the measured community structures resulting from DNA extracted with each of the procedures. Most striking was the observation that a significantly higher amount of eukaryotic DNA (humans, fungi, plants) was extracted using the MetaHIT protocol compared with the HMP protocol (Figure  2). Conversely, we observed significantly higher numbers of reads mapping to bacterial gene catalogs from HMP as well as MetaHIT consortia for DNA extracted using the HMP protocol (Figure  5). We speculate that this might be because the lysis procedure of the MoBio® kit used by the HMP consortium may be optimized to lyse bacterial and not eukaryotic envelopes. When focusing on the 25 most abundant genera, we observed that, with only a few exceptions, the MetaHIT method estimated a lower abundance of the genera within the Bacteroidetes than the HMP method (Figure  3A). For three out of six Bacteriodetes, the estimated abundances were significantly lower when applying the MetaHIT protocol (Figure  3B). This was also reflected in a significant difference between the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio obtained with the two methods (Figure S1 in Additional file 2). This ratio is important for the interpretation of the functional capacity of the intestinal metagenome, and has been proposed to be of importance for risk of obesity [26,27]. None of the most abundant species within the phyla Actinobacteria and Verrucomicrobia were differently affected by the two methods, indicating that the impact of the extraction methods on Firmicutes and Bacteriodetes are not solely due to the differences between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial membranes. In general, however, the Gram-negative genera were most sensitive to choice of method, as one of the proteobacterial genera was also differently affected, with the highest abundance of Sutterella obtained after HMP protocol extraction. Taken together, only 3 out of 16 Gram-positive genera were differently extracted, while this was the case for 4 out of 9 Gram-negative genera, which were all most efficiently extracted by the HMP protocol. Although speculative, it is likely that for the Gram-negative cell envelopes, which are generally easier to disrupt than Gram-positive cell walls, differences between membrane structure of the individual species play a more pronounced role in their susceptibility to the lysis approaches applied. We find particularly that the systematic differences in extraction of DNA from Bacteroidetes species are important to consider when comparing data across studies where different protocols have been applied. In studies where it is important to detect low-abundant species within this phylum, it may be considered to apply the HMP protocol, which seemed to extract DNA from this particular phylum more efficiently.

Although the listed differences between protocols are important to consider, we found it reassuring that the variation attributed to the choice of method was still less than the variation attributed to differences between individual samples (Figure  4A; Figure S2 in Additional file 2). We also observed that the overall correlation of the two methods in their capacity to detect even low abundant bacterial species was very high (rho = 0.97), despite a skew towards more Bacteroidetes species detected with the HMP method (Figure S3 in Additional file 2). However, a similar skew was not seen for gene abundance (Figure S4 in Additional file 2). Comparison of gene catalogs for each individual replicate showed large variation in the gene content detected with each individual DNA extraction, and only approximately 34% of the total gene catalog was detected within all three replicates of both methods (Figure  6B). We observed a number of 'method-specific' genera and genes (Figure  6C,D), and a more careful examination of these revealed that the HMP protocol clearly enriched for genera within the Bacteroidetes.To our knowledge, this is the first study addressing the effect of homogenization of fecal samples on the variability of metagenomic data. Not surprisingly, we found that homogenization of samples before DNA extraction resulted in less within-sample variability (Figure  4B). Although this is probably of little relevance in cross-sectional studies based on a ‘snapshot’ of human populations to be compared, it is worth considering in longitudinal studies, where samples taken from the same individual are to be compared with each other. However, in studies addressing the abundance of, for example, bacterial mRNA, the homogenization procedure must be expected to affect the outcome, and is not recommended.
Conclusion

We found a skew in both the taxonomic and functional distribution of genes specific to the DNA extraction method used, and those differences might have an influence on the functional interpretation of results, even though they overall affect a small percentage of the total estimated microbial communities. In this context, it should be noted that the sequencing approach [28], the sequencing technology [29,30] and the choice of bioinformatics tools [31] also affect the outcome of metagenomic studies, although these issues were beyond the scope of the present study. Furthermore, current interpretation of metagenomic results is limited and defined by previously characterized and cultured bacterial species. While the vast majority of the bacterial genes present in the human gut remain unclassified in terms of taxonomy and function, defining the impact of our ‘other genome’ on human health and disease is thus still a challenging task.
Consent