From wearables to health apps and devices, the fitness tech industry is buzzing with the latest gadgets and hottest trends on the market. Whether it is a wearable fitness tracker or a vibrating fork, these trendy gadgets promise improved health and claim to be influential in changing health-related behavior.

As of late, Nike has taken center stage, reducing staff dedicated to the FuelBand product, with the likelihood of discontinuing the tracker as a whole — evidence that these devices may not be everything we thought they would. There have also been reports of inaccuracies in the data provided to consumers and a number of recalls from different brands; Fitbit most recently and Jawbone upon the release of its first UP band, due to issues in functionality and wearability. As a result, many users are beginning to wonder if the beloved wristband’s hype is warranted, begging the question: Aside from providing greater visibility into our daily physical activity, what are the real, lasting benefits?

I consider myself a member of the quantified-self movement and certainly am a fitness gadget aficionado. This technology has been a large part of my personal health journey, and I obviously recognize the benefits associated with activity tracking and goal logging. But when you think about health it’s crucial to consider the whole equation. One of the most important parts of this “health equation” is that of the social connection. To their credit, elements of sharing have been incorporated in the wearing of these gadgets, providing users with visibility into the activity level of their friends and family. If we want to encourage sustainable, healthy behaviors for the long term, then we need to provide today’s consumers with an engaging approach and meaningful data that can be used to change their health in a holistic sense.

The Power of Social Motivation

Advancements in fitness tech have provided us with new opportunities to take back control of our own health. New apps and gadgets have inspired many people to become more engaged in, their health than ever before. In spite of this renewed interest in health and fitness, many wearable device makers are failing to maintain long-term interest in their products.

Today’s wearables are have yet to provide the social aspect that people need to maintain their health in the long-term in an easy-to-use way. The power of a social motivation speaks volumes: A study conducted in January 2013 by the University of South Carolina found that Twitter helped people lose weight, citing the social element as they key to helping support and encourage others on their path to healthier living.

Individual consumers aren’t the only ones with skin in the game, either: Employers are tasked now to provide health and wellness programs to their employees. Rather than handing out an impersonal wristband, many companies are turning to alternative, social programs that foster teamwork, sharing, and support for making real changes.

So What’s Missing?

Another glaring issue with fitness-inspired hardware is that of price, as most of these devices are about $100. Those who may not be able to afford them are often the ones who need to take control of their health the most. The expense, combined with lack of meaningful (and often inaccurate) data, doesn’t make it easy to develop sustained lifestyle changes for improved health.

A well-rounded approach to improved health doesn’t need to have a hefty price tag. More of us should be thinking bigger picture here: Health as a social opportunity that allows us to feel supported and accountable for establishing goals and meeting them. Engaging in creative ways that include teamwork (or even healthy competition) is shown to be far more effective in changing and sustaining positive lifestyle habits. Whether it’s teaming up with a family member or friend to take walks or hit the gym or joining a food-conscious group like Weight Watchers, teaming up for better health is a proven strategy that actually works.

Combined with social interactivity and sharing, fitness-focused hardware can be useful and effective, but some changes need to be made. The future of gadgets and other consumer technologies to encourage healthier living needs to incorporate relevant data that helps to paint the real picture of a person’s health. Perhaps this is why Intel scooped up Basis Science, the developers of a tracker with the typical functionality of its competitors, but also includes the ability to provide feedback on heart rate, perspiration and body temperature. While these things don’t necessarily bring more critical issues to the forefront the way other health data would, it’s a step in the right direction. Whether it’s the incorporation of biometrics, a 3-D model of changes in weight, apps that compliment the hardware, or social networks that allow for sharing, the makers of these gadgets should consider how to better provide usable data and foster the social side of the experience by way of the tools they provide.

Bridging the Gap

The answer to what works in terms of changing your health is social, and these days, it’s impossible to ignore the influence of technology in supporting long-term changes in health. Wearables, in their current state, don’t provide the data we need to understand the greater snapshot of our health, and by nature are exclusive, rather than inclusive. To effectively maintain long-term engagement, and, in turn, sustainable health and fitness practices, we need to first change our thinking — there are no quick fixes, and snapping a bracelet with WiFi connectivity can’t work on its own. Instead, we should pull elements of technology to help support our journeys to better health, interacting with others who are dedicated to healthy lifestyles to keep us accountable and provide support for the peaks and the valleys along the way.

What works for one person may not work for another, but it’s clear that combining technological innovations with community and social interaction is a sure path to developing sustainable changes for a healthier life, helping to provide a holistic approach in the truest sense of the word. Certainly as technology advances and new innovations present themselves, they will likely offer different forms of connectivity — individually and with the greater community — to help encourage permanent changes for a happier, healthier life.