Rockstar 'Leak' Hints at GTA 5 First-Person Mode
Official website allegedly suggests new features for PC, Xbox One and PS4; Leak yet to be verified.
by Rob Crossley on September 22, 2014
Grand Theft Auto 5 on PC, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One will include a new first-person mode in both vehicles and on foot, according to an alleged Rockstar Games web page.
The first-person mode is part of a raft of new features that were listed on Rockstar's official website--although, the post is believed to be unfinished--before the web page was taken offline. However, a Googlecache of the alleged article still exists.
If the page is accurate, the next-gen versions of Grand Theft Auto 5 will also include a "newly overhauled character selection screen," as well as "a wealth of new easter eggs and random events for Story Mode".
However it is possible that the Googlecache page, found by a Reddit user, could be the work of a hoaxer. Even if genuine, the unfinished page could have been pulled because some of the features were not final. GameSpot has contacted Rockstar for clarification.
In terms of graphical improvements, the web page writes that the next gen version will boast "increased draw distances, finer texture details, denser traffic, and enhanced resolutions all work together to bring new life to the cities, towns, deserts and oceans of Rockstar North’s epic reimagining of Southern California."
Meanwhile, Grand Theft Auto Online will benefit from "an extensive array of new Jobs, an arsenal of new weapons, scores of new vehicles, new properties and player customizations will also be available for the PlayStation 4 system, Xbox One and PC with much more to come."
The webpage then goes on to list the following features:
A brand new first person mode for vehicles that shows the interior of the vehicle, including working speedometers, tachometers, dash lights, and more.
A brand new first person mode while on foot.
A wealth of new easter eggs and random events for Story Mode.
New animals roaming Los Santos.
Players that transfer characters from Xbox 360 or PS3 will receive free new weapons and a free garage in GTA Online.
Newly overhauled character selection screen.
In mid-September, Rockstar delayed the GTA V PC release date to late January, but confirmed that the GTA 5 PS4 and Xbox One release date is set for November 18 across North America and Europe.
Rockstar has officially listed a range of improvements to the game already, such as:
New weapons, vehicles and activities
Additional wildlife
Denser traffic
New foliage system
Enhanced damage and weather effects
Those who pre-order the next-gen and PC versions will also receive $1,000,000 in-game bonus cash to spend across Grand Theft Auto V and Grand Theft Auto Online.
As previously speculated, the development team at Rockstar North will also bolster its in-game radio stations with more than 100 new songs and new DJ mixes.
Meanwhile, for the next-gen versions of GTA Online the player count has increased, allowing up to 30 players on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One. All existing gameplay upgrades and content released on GTA Online will also be available on the next-gen and PC editions, with Rockstar pledging "much more to come".
