Australia has an economic growth rate that is still the envy of the developed world, so why does it feel like we are struggling?

Partly because we have been trained by economists and politicians to think that gross domestic product, our so-called GDP, is the best indicator of our national economic health.
Graphic: RBA

Graphic: RBA

But let's break things down a bit.
Advertisement

When economists talk about "real GDP" they are really talking about production.

And production refers to the number of homes we build, the tonnes of coal and iron ore we pump out, the number of restaurant meals we serve, etc.
It doesn't matter how much we are producing, but how much we are earning off the back of that, says Chris Richardson, from Deloitte Access Economics.

It doesn't matter how much we are producing, but how much we are earning off the back of that, says Chris Richardson, from Deloitte Access Economics. Photo: Supplied

So when they talk about GDP, they're talking about the quantity of stuff we're making.

And the reason they like to talk about "real GDP" is because it is often a useful proxy for underlying trends in what we might think of as the revenue, or national income of the economy.

If we're producing and selling a lot of things, we're making money too. And if we sell more things, presumably our national income will go up.

But there are times, like now, when production growth stops being a good proxy for national income.

Why?

"Because it doesn't matter how many tonnes of coal or iron ore we produce. What matters is how much we're earning off the back of that," Deloitte Access Economics director Chris Richardson says.

"If a supermarket sells a tonne of cereal boxes but it's selling those boxes for less than they cost to make, then the supermarket will be losing money. Should it be happy or unhappy with that outcome? It should be unhappy."

So that's the conceptual gap we're dealing with - should we be focusing on production or should we be focusing on income?

Income is the more fundamental concept, because it is the thing that provides the "feel good" factor in an economy.

And that brings us back to the beginning.

National income has been falling, along with real wages, for the past six months.

Bureau of Statistics figures this week showed real income has fallen for two quarters in a row, resulting in an "income recession", using the two-consecutive-quarters rule of thumb.

A big part of the reason real income has been falling is because the terms of trade – the prices we get for our exports compared to the prices we pay for our imports – have deteriorated 8.9 per cent year on year, thanks to a huge fall in commodity prices.

Those falls in commodity prices are weighing heavily on our national income.

Falling national income is the reason we are noticing the lack of that feel good factor in the economy, even though annual GDP growth is still 2.7 per cent.

But don't worry too much yet.

Private economists say we should not dwell too long on this negative news.

AMP's chief economist Shane Oliver said this week the phenomenon of an income recession was not new, given we also had income recessions in 2011-12 and through the global financial crisis.

He also said the rises and falls in mining and energy exports prices that had been having such a big impact on the terms of trade actually had a far more modest impact on Australia's economy.

The September quarter national accounts, released on Wednesday, were still consistent with the Reserve Bank"s forecast for GDP growth to slow to 2.5 per cent for the year to the December quarter this year, he said.

He expects economic growth to pick up to about 3 per cent next year, as the re-balancing of the economy continues.

However, he warned that if the terms of trade continued to fall sharply the economy might need assistance.

"[And] if more assistance to the economy is not delivered by a further fall in the value of the Australian dollar in the months ahead there is a now a high chance that the RBA will respond with another rate cut early next year."

    More economic news and analysis
    Follow us on Twitter @BusinessDay


Read more: http://www.smh.com.au/business/the-economy/australias-economy-is-still-growing-so-why-does-it-feel-like-were-struggling-20141204-1200xg.html#ixzz3KwRu9gF8
